THE large consumption of fossil fuels has caused serious issues, such as energy shortages, environmental pollution, and global warming [1]. As a renewable and sustainable energy source, solar energy is attracting more and more attention, where photovoltaics is one of the primary ways [2]. The photovoltaic (PV) arrays are the most fundamental part of the PV system and are prone to suffer from various faults due to the harsh outdoor environment [3]. Since these faults have different levels of harm to the PV system, it is of great significance to accurately diagnose the types of faults, thereby reducing the economic loss of power generation and avoiding safety accidents.

In the last decades, many studies focused on PV fault diagnosis have been carried out. The existing methods can be mainly categorized into three types: sensing-based methods [4]–​[6], electrical characteristics-based methods [2], [7], [8] and machine learning-based (ML) methods [9], [10]. The sensing-based methods and electrical characteristics-based methods rely on manual fault feature extraction and some key parameters need to be determined through specific experiments according to the topology, which reduces the generalization of models and is not suitable for increasingly complex PV stations. Compared with them, the ML-based methods are data-driven and automatically extract fault features through a large number of samples, which has occupied a dominant position in the field of fault diagnosis.

However, the existing ML-based methods developed fault diagnosis models based on a single PV station without considering the case that both the types and number of fault samples are insufficient. They either assumed that the collected fault samples were sufficient and improved the accuracy of fault diagnosis through advanced neural networks, or assumed that the number of fault samples was insufficient but already contained all types of faults to be diagnosed. Although these methods are practically important and achieve high accuracy, it is equally significant to study scenarios involving multiple PV stations to collaboratively train a shared fault diagnosis model, which is considered an important way to break data island [11], [12], [13]. In fact, it is difficult for a single PV station to collect samples of all fault types, and there is an unbalanced distribution of samples from multiple PV stations. If these samples can be fully utilized together, the generalization of the model can be significantly improved without losing accuracy. Thus, it is important to design a new ML framework to make multiple PV stations learn the fault features contained in the local data from each other.

To design a new collaborative fault diagnosis framework for multiple PV stations, the following three challenges need to be addressed: data island, framework robustness, and modeling efficiency. First, the collected samples contain the privacy information of the PV system. Since multiple PV stations belong to different operators, they are not allowed to share the original data directly. A privacy-preserving data interaction framework should be adopted. Second, the validity and accuracy of the fault diagnosis model are essential to the safe and stable operation of the PV system. The robustness of the collaborative fault diagnosis modeling must be guaranteed. Third, the modeling efficiency is seriously affected by model update strategy due to different amounts of data and computing capabilities [14]. Hence it is important to design a novel global model aggregation scheme to reduce the communication overhead and training time.

In this paper, we propose a novel federated learning (FL) method that combines the decentralized (serverless) framework and asynchronous update strategy for PV fault diagnosis. The problem of the unbalanced distribution of fault samples and data island among multiple PV stations is addressed through collaborative fault diagnosis while ensuring data privacy, as well as the framework robustness and modeling efficiency issues. The proposed method fully utilizes the data of multiple PV stations to improve the generalization of the model without losing accuracy and is suitable for various meteorological conditions.

We mainly focus on three common PV array faults in this paper: 1) short-circuit faults, defined as the accidental connection or low impedance between two points in the PV array [15]; 2) degradation faults, defined as the increase in the equivalent series resistance or the decrease in the parallel resistance after a certain time of operation [16]; 3) partial shading faults, defined as the reduction of actual effective irradiance of the PV module due to surface dust, clouds, or other objects blocking the sunlight [17].

Our major contributions are summarized as follows:

This paper focuses on the collaborative modeling method in PV fault diagnosis, which enables multiple PV stations to learn the fault features from others without sharing original data, and improves model generalization. To solve the problem of server paralysis in the existing centralized FL methods, a novel asynchronous decentralized federated learning (ADFL) framework is proposed to achieve the distributed aggregation of global models.

Considering the difference in computing capability and amount of data for each PV station, a new global model aggregation algorithm is proposed to dynamically determine the participating agents in each round. An asynchronous update scheme is designed to accelerate the global model aggregation, which greatly reduces communication overhead and training time. The theoretical convergence analysis of the proposed algorithm is given.

Extensive experiments are carried out based on simulation and real-world data to show that our method enables each PV station to accurately identify more fault types and is suitable for various meteorological conditions.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the related work. Section III describes the system model. Section IV introduces the ADFL based collaborative fault diagnosis method. Section V presents the experimental and numerical simulation results. Section VI concludes the paper.